spec: extract power drivers to independent repositories (#248)
maas/maas: specs/6690-power-drivers-extract/spec.md

# Feature Specification: Extract Power Drivers to Independent Repositories

**Feature Branch**: `6690-power-drivers-extract`  
**Created**: 2025-01-13  
**Status**: Draft  
**Input**: Move power drivers to their own repositories with entry point discovery mechanism, common interface, and snap distribution.

## User Scenarios & Testing *(mandatory)*

### User Story 1 - MAAS discovers installed power drivers at startup (Priority: P1)

> **Description**: When MAAS region or rack controller starts, it automatically discovers all installed power driver packages through Python entry points. Administrators install power driver packages separately, and MAAS recognizes them without requiring changes to MAAS core.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Description**: When MAAS agent starts, it automatically discovers all installed power driver packages. Administrators install power driver snap packages separately, and MAAS recognizes them without requiring changes to MAAS core.
```

**Why this priority**: This is the foundational capability. Without runtime discovery, the entire separation architecture cannot function. All other stories depend on this working correctly.

**Independent Test**: Can be fully tested by installing a mock power driver package with an entry point, starting the rack controller, and verifying that `PowerDriverRegistry` contains the driver. Delivers a working plugin architecture.

**Acceptance Scenarios**:

1. **Given** a fresh MAAS installation with no external power drivers, **When** the rack controller starts, **Then** only builtin drivers (e.g., `manual`) are available in `PowerDriverRegistry`

> 2. **Given** a MAAS installation with `maas-power-driver-ipmi` package installed, **When** the rack controller starts, **Then** the `ipmi` driver is discoverable via `PowerDriverRegistry.get_item("ipmi")`

Reviewer: We assume that user had to do `snap connect` in order for agent (rackd) to know about available power drivers.

3. **Given** multiple power driver packages are installed, **When** the rack controller starts, **Then** all drivers from all packages are registered and available

> 4. **Given** a power driver package is uninstalled, **When** the rack controller restarts, **Then** that driver is no longer available in the registry

Reviewer: Bonus: do this without restart

# Feature Specification: Extract Power Drivers to Independent Repositories

**Feature Branch**: `6690-power-drivers-extract`  
**Created**: 2025-01-13  
**Status**: Draft  
**Input**: Move power drivers to their own repositories with snap plug/slot discovery mechanism, language-agnostic interface via JSON metadata, and snap distribution.

## Clarifications

- **Language-agnostic**: Power drivers may be implemented in any programming language (Python, Go, Rust, etc.). The interface between MAAS and drivers is a JSON-based protocol, not a language-specific API.

> - **Snap plug/slot discovery**: Drivers are distributed as separate snaps. When a driver snap connects to the MAAS snap (via a content plug and slot), it exposes driver metadata as a JSON file at a known path. MAAS discovers drivers by scanning these JSON files at runtime.

Reviewer: > MAAS discovers drivers by scanning these JSON files at runtime.

Maybe http://socket/metadata.json

- Each driver repository has its own CI pipeline for testing and snap building

## Key Entities

### Power Driver Metadata JSON
- **Purpose**: Describes a driver's capabilities, parameters, and invocation details to MAAS
- **Location**: Exposed at the snap content interface path when the driver snap is connected
- **Schema** (key fields):
  - `name`: Unique driver identifier (e.g., `ipmi`, `redfish`)
  - `description`: Human-readable description
  - `version`: Driver version string
  - `actions`: List of supported actions (`on`, `off`, `query`, `cycle`, `reset`, `set-boot-order`)
  - `settings`: Array of parameter definitions (name, label, type, required, choices, scope, secret)
  - `ip_extractor`: Field name and regex pattern for extracting IP address from parameters
  - `executable`: Path to the driver binary/script within the snap
  - `protocol`: Communication method (`subprocess` or `http`)
  - `capabilities`: Flags (`queryable`, `chassis`, `can_probe`, `can_set_boot_order`)
- **Validation**: MAAS validates metadata against a JSON Schema before accepting the driver

### Power Driver Protocol
- **Purpose**: Language-agnostic communication between MAAS and driver processes

> - **Transport**: Subprocess with JSON lines on stdin/stdout (primary), or local HTTP (alternative)

Reviewer: Shouldn't it be HTTP over the unix socket?

> - **Request format**: JSON object with `action`, `system_id`, `hostname`, `context` (power parameters)

Reviewer: I doubt `hostname` is needed, `system_id` is nice to have for debugging.

- **Response format**: JSON object with `state` (for query) or `status`/`error` (for actions)
- **Error format**: JSON object with `error_type` and `error_message`

> - **Lifecycle**: Driver process is started per-action (subprocess) or long-running (HTTP)

Reviewer: Long running service, listening on a unix socket

- **Discovery**: Populated by scanning the snap content slot path for metadata JSON files
- **Reload**: Supports hot-reload when snaps are connected/disconnected/updated

### Snap Content Interface
- **Purpose**: The snap plug/slot mechanism that exposes driver metadata to MAAS
- **Slot** (MAAS snap): `power-drivers` — a directory where driver metadata JSON files appear
- **Plug** (driver snap): `power-drivers` — connects to MAAS's slot, provides metadata JSON
- **Path convention**: Each driver writes a single metadata JSON file named `<driver-name>.json`

### Driver Repository Structure
- **Purpose**: Standard layout for each driver's git repository
- **Contents**:
  - Driver implementation source code
  - Test suite (unit tests, integration tests against real or mocked BMCs)
  - Documentation (driver-specific README, supported hardware, configuration guide)
  - `snap/snapcraft.yaml` (snap build configuration)
  - Metadata JSON template (processed during snap build to include version, executable path, etc.)
- **Independence**: Each repository builds, tests, and releases without requiring the MAAS monorepo

> ### Driver Grouping

Reviewer: I would remove the grouping, each power driver in it's own snap

- **Purpose**: Logical grouping of related drivers into shared snaps
- **Groups**:

>   - `maas-power-drivers-core`: `manual` (builtin in MAAS snap)

Reviewer: The `manual` power driver is more of a no-op, so it doesn't require a separate snap at all

  - `maas-power-driver-ipmi`: `ipmi`, `moonshot`
  - `maas-power-driver-redfish`: `redfish`, `openbmc`
  - `maas-power-driver-ibm`: `hmc`, `hmcz`, `mscm`
  - `maas-power-driver-amt`: `amt`
  - `maas-power-driver-apc`: `apc`
  - `maas-power-driver-vmware`: `vmware`, `proxmox`

>   - `maas-power-driver-webhook`: `webhook`

Reviewer: Let's remove the `webhook` completely, we can implement it natively inside rackd

4. **Given** the `maas-power` command is invoked, **When** it runs, **Then** it prints a deprecation warning directing users to the driver snap's own CLI tool
5. **Given** a driver snap is connected to a rack, **When** the region queries that rack for available power types, **Then** the new driver appears in the rack's power type list

## Assumptions

- Power drivers may be written in any programming language (Python, Go, Rust, C, shell, etc.)
- Each driver runs as a long-running service communicating over HTTP on UNIX domain sockets
- Driver capabilities are discovered by querying the live service — there is no static metadata JSON file
- Snap content interfaces (plug/slot) provide a shared directory for UNIX sockets
- Driver snaps run with `strict` confinement (same as MAAS)
- System-level dependencies (e.g., `freeipmi-tools`, `amtterm`) are included in the driver snap, not the MAAS snap
- The `webhook` power driver remains builtin in MAAS core (no external dependencies, useful for testing)

> - The `manual` power driver is dropped entirely

Reviewer: Dropped as a driver, but such logic should still remain in MAAS (otherwise there are places where we require power to be configured)

## Key Entities

### Driver Service Protocol (HTTP over UNIX Socket)
- **Purpose**: Language-agnostic communication between `rackd` and driver services
- **Transport**: HTTP over UNIX domain socket in the shared snap content directory
- **Wire format**: Standard HTTP requests/responses with JSON bodies
- **Endpoints**:
  - `GET /` — returns driver capabilities (name, description, version, actions, settings, capability flags)
  - `POST /query` — returns current power state (`on`, `off`, `unknown`)
  - `POST /on` — powers on the node
  - `POST /off` — powers off the node
  - `POST /cycle` — cycles power
  - `POST /reset` — resets power
  - `POST /set-boot-order` — configures boot order
- **Request body**: JSON object with `system_id`, `hostname`, `context` (power parameters)
- **Response format**: JSON object with `status` (`ok`/`error`), optional `state` (for queries), optional `error_type` and `error_message`
- **HTTP status codes**: 200 for success, 503 for unavailable, 400 for invalid parameters, 500 for driver errors
- **Lifecycle**: Driver is a long-running service; `rackd` connects as needed, does not manage the service lifecycle

> ### Power Driver Registry

Reviewer: This registry is on the region?

- **Purpose**: Runtime registry of all discovered power drivers on a rack
- **Operations**: `register_item()`, `get_item()`, `get_schema()`, iteration over registered drivers
- **Discovery**: Populated by `rackd` scanning the shared socket directory and querying each service for capabilities

> - **Reload**: Supports hot-reload when driver services appear or disappear

Reviewer: I dunno if it needs a clarification that we are talking about rackd hot-reload

### Snap Content Interface
- **Purpose**: The snap plug/slot mechanism that provides a shared directory for UNIX sockets

> - **Slot** (MAAS snap): `power-drivers` — a directory where driver services place their UNIX sockets

Reviewer: I think it should be singular? IIRC snap will have a indexed folder names for every new connection

- **Plug** (driver snap): `power-drivers` — connects to MAAS's slot, driver service writes its socket here
- **Socket naming**: Each driver writes a UNIX socket named `<driver-name>.sock`

### Rack-to-Region Driver Lifecycle Notification
- **Purpose**: Keeps the region's view of available power types in sync with each rack
- **Trigger**: Driver service appears (snap connect + service start) or disappears (snap disconnect / service stop)

> - **Direction**: Rack controller → Region controller (via existing RPC channel)

Reviewer: I think it should be existing HTTP v3 internal API. We want to notify from the Go implementation of rackd (the maas-agent)

- **Payload**: Driver capabilities (same as the capabilities query response) for additions; driver name for removals
- **On rack startup**: `rackd` sends the complete set of available drivers to the region during registration

### Driver Repository Structure
- **Purpose**: Standard layout for each driver's git repository
- **Contents**:

>   - Driver implementation source code (service binary)

Reviewer: Not always a binary?

- **Independence**: Each repository builds, tests, and releases without requiring the MAAS monorepo

### Driver Listing
- **Purpose**: Each driver is an independent project — no grouping
- **Drivers**:
  - `webhook` (builtin in MAAS snap)
  - `ipmi` (independent snap)
  - `redfish` (independent snap)
  - `amt` (independent snap)
  - `apc` (independent snap)
  - `dli` (independent snap)
  - `eaton` (independent snap)
  - `hmc` (independent snap)
  - `hmcz` (independent snap)
  - `moonshot` (independent snap)
  - `mscm` (independent snap)
  - `msftocs` (independent snap)
  - `openbmc` (independent snap)
  - `proxmox` (independent snap)
  - `raritan` (independent snap)
  - `recs` (independent snap)
  - `seamicro` (independent snap)
  - `ucsm` (independent snap)
  - `vmware` (independent snap)
  - `wedge` (independent snap)

## Success Criteria

- MAAS rack controller discovers all connected driver services within 1 second of service start
- Zero power driver tests fail after extraction (100% test pass rate preserved)
- All 20 external power driver types remain functional after extraction (webhook stays builtin)

> - The `maas-power` command prints a deprecation warning and exits (driver snaps provide their own CLI tools)

Reviewer: Let's drop CLI support. We need only API over HTTP to call the power driver from rackd

- A new power driver can be added by building and connecting a driver snap (no MAAS core changes required)

> - A power driver written in a non-Python language (e.g., Go) can be discovered and invoked by `rackd`

Reviewer: Sounds a bit odd. I am not sure if we want to support non-snapped drivers at all. Maybe we have just a hard requirement on snaps only

- The HTTP-over-UNIX-socket protocol specification is published for third-party driver authors
- No breaking changes to existing MAAS APIs or RPC interfaces

> - The MAAS snap declares a `power-drivers` content slot that driver snaps can connect to

Reviewer: Shouldn't it be singular `power-driver`?

> - The region controller receives timely notifications when drivers are added or removed from a rack

Reviewer: Maybe we need to make it clear that regiond is notified via v3 internal API (not the RPC)
